Where email should live
1) Primary place: final AI decision step in Task #40

This is the most important place.

Why:
By the time Beacon reaches the final decision step, it already knows:

customer situation
treatment chosen
blockers / guardrails
review triggers
missing info
policy context
communication guidelines

That is exactly when AI can decide:

should we send an email at all?
what should the email try to achieve?
what tone should it use?
or should it return NO_ACTION?

So email generation belongs in the final decision output, not in derived fields or business fields.

2) Supporting place: compiled policy / decision packet

The final AI needs the policy-side communication rules.

So in the compiled policy and then in the decision packet, you should include a section like:

communicationGuidelines
emailGuidelines
emailWhenToUse
emailWhenNotToUse
tone / compliance constraints

Why:
The final AI should not draft emails from generic instinct.
It should draft them using the client’s configured communication policy.

3) Validator should check email consistency

Also in Task #40.

Validator should check:

if proposed_email_to_customer != NO_ACTION, is that consistent with:
chosen treatment
blockers / guardrails
review triggers
internal-only actions
if case is escalation-only or internal monitoring only, email should usually be NO_ACTION
if email is drafted, it should not contradict the treatment or facts

So email belongs in:

final decision prompt
final decision validator
Where it should NOT live
Not in Task #38

That is deterministic only.
Email is not deterministic core logic.

Not in Task #39

Business field inference is for field values like:

vulnerability status
engagement
hardship indicators

Email drafting is not a business field.
It is a final action communication artifact.

Not mainly in Task #41

UI only displays what was decided.
It should not own email logic.

What I would add to the plans
Add to Task #40 — decision packet

Include a communication policy section in the packet, for example:

communication: {
  communicationGuidelines: string[];
  emailGuidelines: string[];
  emailWhenToUse: string[];
  emailWhenNotToUse: string[];
  toneGuidance?: string[];
}

This should come from the compiled policy / SOP config.

Add to Task #40 — final prompt

In the final decision prompt, explicitly instruct the model:

decide whether an email is needed
if yes, draft it in ≤10 lines
if no, return NO_ACTION
only send email when it advances the treatment or customer handling
use communication guidelines from policy
Add to Task #40 — output schema

You already have:

"proposed_email_to_customer": "Subject: ... Body: ... OR NO_ACTION"

Keep that in the final output schema.
That is the correct place.

Add to Task #40 — validator rules for email

Validator should check:

Email allowed?

If treatment / case context suggests no external outreach, then email should be NO_ACTION.

Email consistent?

If email is drafted:

it must align with chosen treatment
it must not ask for things irrelevant to the case
it must not contradict blockers / review triggers
it must not invent facts
Exact wording I’d tell Replit to add

You can send this directly:

Add email handling explicitly to Task #40

Email should be handled in the final decision stage, not in derived fields or business-field inference.

Why

By the final decision stage, Beacon already knows:

customer situation
selected treatment
blockers / guardrails
review triggers
missing information
policy context

That is the correct point to decide:

whether an email should be sent
what the email should try to achieve
what tone it should use
or whether to return NO_ACTION
Required additions
1. Add communication guidance into compiled policy / decision packet

Include a section in the decision packet such as:

communicationGuidelines
emailWhenToUse
emailWhenNotToUse
toneGuidance

This should come from the client SOP / policy configuration.

2. Keep proposed_email_to_customer in the final output schema

Format:

Subject: ... Body: ...
or NO_ACTION
3. Add explicit final-prompt instructions for email

The final AI prompt should include guidance like:

Draft an email only if it meaningfully advances the recommended treatment or customer handling.
Return NO_ACTION if no email is needed.
Use communication guidelines and tone guidance from policy.
Typical valid email purposes include:
request missing documents or information
answer a customer’s outstanding question
acknowledge hardship and explain support path
inform next steps
reinforce a good repayment path
re-engage respectfully when appropriate
Do not draft an email for internal-only actions, monitoring-only actions, or escalation-only outcomes unless policy explicitly supports customer outreach.
4. Add validator checks for email consistency

If proposed_email_to_customer != NO_ACTION, validator should check:

email is consistent with the recommended treatment
email does not contradict blockers, guardrails, or review triggers
email does not invent unsupported facts
email is not present when the action is purely internal/escalation-only unless explicitly justified
Suggested prompt text to add into final decision prompt

In the final AI system/user prompt, add something like:

EMAIL DECISION RULES
You must decide whether a customer email is needed.

Return:
- "NO_ACTION" if no email should be sent
OR
- "Subject: ... Body: ..." if an email would meaningfully advance the recommended treatment or customer handling.

Only draft an email when it helps achieve one of these purposes:
- request missing information or documents
- answer a customer’s open question clearly
- acknowledge hardship and explain support or next steps
- inform the customer of the next step we are taking and what we need from them
- reinforce positive repayment behaviour
- re-engage a silent customer respectfully when appropriate

Do not draft an email for internal-only actions, monitoring-only actions, or escalation-only actions unless the decision packet clearly supports customer outreach.

Use the communication guidelines and tone guidance provided in the decision packet.
Keep the email concise and operational.
Do not invent facts not present in the decision packet.